Add Topic Statistics to concepts (#767)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Concepts/About-Topic-Statistics.rst

.. redirect-from::

    About-Topic-Statistics

About Topic Statistics

> =================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
======================
```

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
--------

> ROS2 provides the integrated measurement of statistics for messages received by any

Reviewer: Add a space: "ROS 2"

`libstatistics_collector <https://github.com/ros-tooling/libstatistics_collector>`__
package. When a new message is received by a subscription, this is a new sample for calculation in
the current measurement window. The average calculated is simply a
`moving average <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moving_average>`__. The maximum, minimum,
and sample count are updated upon receipt of each new sample, whereas the standard deviation is
calculated using `Welford's online algorithm <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithms_for_calculating_variance\#Welford's_online_algorithm>`__.

Types of Statistics Calculated
------------------------------

* Received Message Period

  * units: milliseconds
  * uses the system clock to measure the period between received messages

* Received Message Age

  * units: milliseconds
  * requires a message to have a timestamp populated in the header field in order to calculate the age of the message as sent from a publisher.

Behavior
--------

By default, Topic Statistics measurements are not enabled. After enabling this feature for
a specific node via the subscription configuration options, both received message age and received

> message period measurements are enabled for that specific subscription. The data is published using the
> `MetricsMessage definition <https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/blob/master/statistics_msgs/msg/MetricsMessage.msg>`__
> found in the `rcl_interfaces package <https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/tree/master/statistics_msgs>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message period measurements are enabled for that specific subscription.
The data is published as a `statistics_msg/msg/MetricsMessage <https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/blob/master/statistics_msgs/msg/MetricsMessage.msg>`__
```

> at a configurable period (default 1 second) to a configurable topic (default /statistics). Here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at a configurable period (default 1 second) to a configurable topic (default ``/statistics``). Here
```

note that the publishing period also serves as the sample collection window period.

Since received message period requires a message timestamp in a header field, empty data is published
if no timestamp is found. This behavior avoids the absence of a signal problem and is meant to explicitly
show that a measurement could not be made.

The first sample of each window for the received message period statistic does not yield a measurement.
This is because, in order to calculate this statistic, it requires knowing the time the previous
message arrived, so subsequent samples in the window yield measurements.

> Comparison to ROS1
> ------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparison to ROS 1
-------------------
```

> Similar to ROS1 `Topic Statistics <http://wiki.ros.org/Topics#Topic_statistics>`__, both message age

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to ROS 1 `Topic Statistics <http://wiki.ros.org/Topics#Topic_statistics>`__, both message age
```

> and message period are calculated, albeit from the subscription side. Other ROS1 metrics, e.g.,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and message period are calculated, albeit from the subscription side. Other ROS 1 metrics, e.g.,
```

the number of dropped messages or traffic volume, are currently not provided.

Support
-------

> This feature is supported in ROS2 Foxy for C++ only (rclcpp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is supported in ROS 2 Foxy for C++ only (rclcpp).
```

> This feature is supported in ROS2 Foxy for C++ only (rclcpp).

Reviewer: Are there intentions to support other client libraries (e.g. moving the implementation to `rcl` would give us that for "free")? If so, it might be worth mentioning these plans and linking to any open tickets.

Author: Will link, as we have a meta ticket open with future work.

.. redirect-from::

    About-Topic-Statistics

> About Topic Statistics

Reviewer 2: I know it's not standard across the docs yet, but we try to do sentence case for all titles and headings
```suggestion
About topic statistics
```

======================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:

Overview
--------

ROS 2 provides the integrated measurement of statistics for messages received by any
subscription.
Allowing a user to collect subscription statistics enables them to characterize
the performance of their system or aid in diagnosis of any present issues.

The measurements provided are the received message age and received message period.

> For each measurement the statistics calculated in a window and are the average, maximum, minimum,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each measurement the statistics calculated in a window are the average, maximum, minimum,
```

Author: My mistake, corrected!

> For each measurement the statistics calculated in a window and are the average, maximum, minimum,

Reviewer 2: Or maybe it's supposed to be 
```suggestion
For each measurement the statistics are calculated in a window and are the average, maximum, minimum,
```

standard deviation, and sample count.

> How Statistics Are Calculated

Reviewer 2: Sentence case:
```suggestion
How statistics are calculated
```

-----------------------------

Each statistic set is calculated in constant time and constant memory
by using the utilities implemented in the
`libstatistics_collector <https://github.com/ros-tooling/libstatistics_collector>`__
package.
When a new message is received by a subscription, this is a new sample for calculation in
the current measurement window.
The average calculated is simply a
`moving average <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moving_average>`__.
The maximum, minimum,and sample count are updated upon receipt of each new sample, whereas the
standard deviation is calculated using `Welford's online algorithm

> <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithms_for_calculating_variance\#Welford's_online_algorithm>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithms_for_calculating_variance#Welford's_online_algorithm>`__.
```

> Types of Statistics Calculated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Types of statistics calculated
```

------------------------------

> * Received Message Period
> 
>   * units: milliseconds
>   * uses the system clock to measure the period between received messages

Reviewer 2: You don't capitalize these normally (like in the first paragraph of the "Behavior" section, so there's no reason to title-case them here
```suggestion
* Received message period

  * Units: milliseconds
  * Uses the system clock to measure the period between received messages
```

> * Received Message Age
> 
>   * units: milliseconds
>   * requires a message to have a timestamp populated in the header field in order to calculate the age of the message as sent from a publisher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Received message age

  * Units: milliseconds
  * Requires a message to have a timestamp populated in the header field in order to calculate the age of the message as sent from a publisher.
```

Behavior
--------

By default, Topic Statistics measurements are not enabled.
After enabling this feature for a specific node via the subscription configuration options, both
received message age and received message period measurements are enabled for that specific subscription.

The data is published as a `statistics_msg/msg/MetricsMessage
<https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/blob/master/statistics_msgs/msg/MetricsMessage.msg>`__
at a configurable period (default 1 second) to a configurable topic (default ``/statistics``).

> Here note that the publishing period also serves as the sample collection window period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the publishing period also serves as the sample collection window period.
```

Since received message period requires a message timestamp in a header field, empty data is published
if no timestamp is found.
This behavior avoids the absence of a signal problem and is meant to explicitly show that a measurement
could not be made.

The first sample of each window for the received message period statistic does not yield a measurement.

> This is because, in order to calculate this statistic, it requires knowing the time the previous
> message arrived, so subsequent samples in the window yield measurements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because calculating this statistic requires knowing the time the previous
message arrived, so subsequent samples in the window yield measurements.
```
